[KB] Using the Semgrep rule schema to write rules in VS Code (#1523)
semgrep/semgrep-docs: docs/kb/rules/using-semgrep-rule-schema-in-vscode.md

---
description: Use the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code to help make rule writing easier.
tags:
  - Rules
  - VS Code
---

import MoreHelp from "/src/components/MoreHelp"

# Use the Semgrep rule schema to write rules in VS Code

> You may already be familiar with writing rules in the [Semgrep Playground](/docs/playground). However, if your IDE of choice is VS Code and you'd like to write Semgrep rules there, utilizing the Semgrep rule schema can be a great aid while doing so. The Semgrep rule schema will provide a richer editing environment, allowing for VS Code to understand the shape of your rule's YAML file, including its value sets, defaults, and descriptions ([reference](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may already be familiar with writing rules in the [Semgrep Playground](/docs/playground). However, if your IDE of choice is VS Code and you'd like to write Semgrep rules there, using the Semgrep rule schema will provide a richer editing environment, allowing VS Code to understand the shape of your rule's YAML file, including its value sets, defaults, and descriptions ([reference](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas)).
```

:::tip

> Writing rules locally in your IDE is also helpful when iteratively testing your rule against an entire local repository, as opposed to just a snippet of test code.

Reviewer: just a possibility for alternate phrasing 
```suggestion
Writing rules locally in your IDE is also helpful for iteratively testing your rule against an entire local repository, as opposed to just a snippet of test code.
```

:::

> When setup properly, you can expect to get auto-completion options in your VS Code IDE just as you would in the Semgrep Playground when writing rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the schema is set up, auto-completion operates in your VS Code IDE just as it does in the Semgrep Playground when writing rules:
```

![Example Semgrep YAML rule file with auto-complete](/img/kb/vscode-schema-autocomplete-example.png)

## Adding the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code

Adding the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code requires two steps:

1. Install the YAML Language Support extension by Red Hat
2. Associate the Semgrep rule schema

### Install the YAML Language Support extension by Red Hat

> You can install the extension either directly in VS Code or by going to the Visual Studio Marketplace and installing it from there. In VS Code, typically just searching `yaml` will yield the correction extension as the top result. However, please verify you are installing the correct extension by ensuring it is the same as the one [linked here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml).

Reviewer: I have some nitpicks about the language here, but more importantly I don't think it's a good idea for us to say "just search yaml" since that might easily change. What should they be looking for after searching YAML to confirm?

Author: The extension is actually just named "YAML", but I can be a bit more specific. Perhaps something like this:

```suggestion
You can install the extension either directly in VS Code or by going to the Visual Studio Marketplace and installing it from there. In VS Code, typically just searching `yaml` will yield the correction extension as the top result. The extension is named "YAML" and is authored by "Red Hat". However, please also verify you are installing the correct extension by ensuring it is the same as the one [linked here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml).
```

### Associate the Semgrep rule schema

> Once the extension is properly installed, you will need to associate the Semgrep rule schema with any Semgrep YAML rule definitions you are working on in VS Code. This can be done in several ways and we suggest first reading the [extension overview](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas) to fully understand all of them. Here, we will cover two of them.

Reviewer: I think I'd go for a different structure here, something like:

> Once the extension is installed, associate the Semgrep rule schema with Semgrep YAML rule definitions you are working on in VS Code using one of two recommended methods.

<method 1 - yaml file>
<method 2 - glob>

And then place the link to the VS Code docs as more context, like:

> Alternatively, consult the [extension overview](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas) for more details and other methods.

Author: I can make the 2 methods clearer in the intro, but I'm hesitant to change the wording of looking at the extension overview as an "alternative". I really want the reader to look there first to start getting an idea before following the KB article

Author: I committed a change just now to address this.

#### Associating a schema directly in the YAML file

> Perhaps the easiest and most direct way to associate the schema is to include the following line at the top of your Semgrep YAML rule file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To associate the schema easily and directly with a Semgrep YAML rule file, include the following line at the top of the file:
```

    # yaml-language-server: $schema=https://json.schemastore.org/semgrep.json

The drawback to this method is that you would have to do this for each YAML rule file.

#### Associating a schema to a glob pattern via `yaml.schemas`

Again, we highly recommend first reading the [extension overview](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-a-schema-to-a-glob-pattern-via-yaml.schemas) as a supplement to this article to better understand how YAML schemas are handled by the extension.

> To associate the Semgrep rule schema via `yaml.schemas` in your VS Code `settings.json` file (on MacOS), go to:

Author: I think other platforms (mainly Windows) also use a `settings.json` file with the same schema and everything, but I just wanted to indicate MacOS because the path/method of getting to the file might be slightly different on Windows

    Code -> Settings -> Settings -> Extensions -> YAML

And then from within those settings, scroll down to where it says `Yaml: Schemas` and click on `Edit in settings.json`, as shown below:

![MacOS VS Code YAML extension settings](/img/kb/vscode-yaml-schemas.png)

This will open up your `settings.json` file with an empty `yaml.schemas` object already entered for you, ready to be filled in and defined. For example, consider the following `yaml.schemas` definition:

```json
"yaml.schemas": {
    "https://json.schemastore.org/semgrep.json": "Downloads/semgrep_rules/*.yaml"
}
```

> Here, we are saying that the schema as defined on the left side of the colon (`:`), should match to the glob pattern as defined on the right side. The glob pattern is matching any `.yaml` file located in a directory structure that matches `Downloads/semgrep_rules/`. Please keep in mind that the glob pattern will differ for varying operating systems and by where you are storing your Semgrep YAML rule files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This associates the schema defined on the left side of the colon (`:`) with files matching the glob pattern on the right. The glob pattern matches any `.yaml` file located in a directory structure that matches `Downloads/semgrep_rules/`. The desired glob pattern differs for different operating systems and should reflect where you are storing Semgrep YAML rule files.
```

---
description: Use the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code to help make rule writing easier.
tags:
  - Rules
  - VS Code
---

import MoreHelp from "/src/components/MoreHelp"

# Use the Semgrep rule schema to write rules in VS Code

> You may already be familiar with writing rules in the [Semgrep Playground](/docs/playground). However, if your IDE of choice is VS Code and you'd like to write Semgrep rules there, using the Semgrep rule schema will provide a richer editing environment, allowing VS Code to understand the shape of your rule's YAML file, including its value sets, defaults, and descriptions ([reference](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You may already be familiar with writing rules in the [Semgrep Editor](/semgrep-code/editor). However, if your IDE of choice is VS Code and you'd like to write Semgrep rules there, using the Semgrep rule schema will provide a richer editing environment, allowing VS Code to understand the shape of your rule's YAML file, including its value sets, defaults, and descriptions ([reference](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas)).
```

I have a WIP PR to remove the Playground doc in favor of an updated Editor doc

:::tip

> Writing rules locally in your IDE is also helpful for iteratively testing your rule against an entire local repository, as opposed to just a snippet of test code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Writing rules locally in your IDE is also helpful for iteratively testing them against an entire local repository, as opposed to just a snippet of test code.
```

:::

> When the schema is set up, auto-completion operates in your VS Code IDE just as it does in the Semgrep Playground when writing rules:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the schema is set up, auto-completion operates in your VS Code IDE just as it does in the Semgrep Editor when writing rules:
```

![Example Semgrep YAML rule file with auto-complete](/img/kb/vscode-schema-autocomplete-example.png)

> ## Adding the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Add the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code
```

Adding the Semgrep rule schema in VS Code requires two steps:

1. Install the YAML Language Support extension by Red Hat
2. Associate the Semgrep rule schema

### Install the YAML Language Support extension by Red Hat

> You can install the extension either directly in VS Code or by going to the Visual Studio Marketplace and installing it from there. In VS Code, typically just searching `yaml` will yield the correction extension as the top result. The extension is named "YAML" and is authored by "Red Hat". However, please also verify you are installing the correct extension by ensuring it is the same as the one [linked here](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can install the  "YAML" extension authored by "Red Hat" directly in VS Code or by going to the Visual Studio Marketplace and installing it from there. In VS Code, go to the **Extensions** pane and search for `yaml`. This should yield the correction extension as the top result. However, please verify that you are installing the correct extension by ensuring it is the same as [this one](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml).
```

### Associate the Semgrep rule schema

> Once the extension is installed, associate the Semgrep rule schema with Semgrep YAML rule definitions you are working on in VS Code using one of two recommended methods:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the extension is installed, associate the Semgrep rule schema with the Semgrep YAML rule definitions you are working on in VS Code using one of following methods:
```

> 1. Directly in the YAML file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Associate directly in the YAML file
```

> 2. Using `yaml.schemas` in your VS Code `settings.json` file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Associate using `yaml.schemas` in your VS Code `settings.json` file
```

> We recommend taking a look at the [extension overview section on associating schemas](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas) as a precursor to gain a preliminary understanding before proceeding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We recommend taking a look at the [extension overview section on associating schemas](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-schemas) to gain a preliminary understanding before proceeding.
```

> #### Associating a schema directly in the YAML file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Associate a schema directly in the YAML file
```

> To associate the schema easily and directly with a Semgrep YAML rule file, include the following line at the top of the file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To associate the schema directly within a Semgrep YAML rule file, include the following line at the top of the file:
```

>     # yaml-language-server: $schema=https://json.schemastore.org/semgrep.json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://json.schemastore.org/semgrep.json
```

I'd also suggest wrapping this in a code block

Author: @khorne3 when tabbed, it's interpreted as a code block

> The drawback to this method is that it must be done independently for each YAML rule file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The drawback to this method is that it must be done for each YAML rule file.
```

> #### Associating a schema to a glob pattern via `yaml.schemas`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Associate a schema to a glob pattern via `yaml.schemas`
```

> Again, we highly recommend first reading the [extension overview](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-a-schema-to-a-glob-pattern-via-yaml.schemas) as a supplement to this article to better understand how YAML schemas are handled by the extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, Semgrep recommends that you read the [extension overview](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=redhat.vscode-yaml#associating-a-schema-to-a-glob-pattern-via-yaml.schemas) as a supplement to this article to better understand how the extension handles YAML schemas.
```

Reviewer: I still feel weird about us saying this. If people need to read the extension docs to do this, maybe it's not a method we should actually recommend. I know if I saw this I'd ignore it, and I even like reading docs.

Author: I'm not sure I agree. When I was doing this, I found it helpful to read the extension overview page, specifically the schema section, before actually taking any action. Similarly I think users would find it beneficial to read over that, then follow our specific instructions with that background knowledge in mind.

> To associate the Semgrep rule schema via `yaml.schemas` in your VS Code `settings.json` file (on MacOS), go to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To associate the Semgrep rule schema via `yaml.schemas` in your VS Code `settings.json` file (on macOS), go to:
```

>     Code -> Settings -> Settings -> Extensions -> YAML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Code -> Settings -> Settings -> Extensions -> YAML**
```

You can also combine this with the line above instead of making this stand-alone.

> In the YAML extension settings, scroll down to `Yaml: Schemas` and click `Edit in settings.json`, as shown below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the YAML extension settings, scroll down to `Yaml: Schemas` and click **Edit in settings.json**.
```

![MacOS VS Code YAML extension settings](/img/kb/vscode-yaml-schemas.png)

> This opens the `settings.json` file with an empty `yaml.schemas` object already entered, ready to be defined. For example, consider the following `yaml.schemas` definition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This opens the `settings.json` file with an empty `yaml.schemas` object ready to be defined. For example, consider the following `yaml.schemas` definition:
```

```json
"yaml.schemas": {
    "https://json.schemastore.org/semgrep.json": "Downloads/semgrep_rules/*.yaml"
}
```

This associates the schema defined on the left side of the colon (`:`) with files matching the glob pattern on the right. The glob pattern matches any `.yaml` file located in a directory structure that matches `Downloads/semgrep_rules/`. The desired glob pattern differs for varying operating systems and should reflect where you are storing Semgrep YAML rule files.

After completing the configuration for `yaml.schemas`, open a Semgrep rule YAML file to verify that a notice shows at the top similar to this one:

![Example Semgrep YAML rule file with schema defined](/img/kb/vscode-yaml-schema-example-file.png)

> This indicates that you've successfully associated the Semgrep rule schema with your Semgrep rule YAML file(s).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This indicates that you've successfully associated the Semgrep rule schema with your Semgrep rule YAML files.
```

Author: I think (s) makes sense, as the user may only care about 1 file, or multiple.
